# Using custom transformers to customize Valet's behavior

In this lab you will build upon the `dry-run` command to override Valet's default behavior and customize the converted workflow using "custom transformers". Custom transformers can be used to:

1. Convert items that are not automatically converted.
2. Convert items that were automatically converted using different actions.
3. Convert environment variable values differently.
4. Convert references to runners to use a different runner name in Actions.

## Prerequisites

1. Followed the steps [here](./readme.md#configure-your-codespace) to set up your GitHub Codespaces environment and start you GitLab server.
2. Completed the [configure lab](./1-configure.md#configuring-credentials).
3. Completed the [dry-run lab](./3-dry-run.md).

## Perform a dry-run

You will be performing a `dry-run` command to inspect the workflow that is converted by default. Run the following command within the codespace terminal:

```bash
# ADD_COMMAND
```

The converted workflow that is generated by the above command can be seen below:

<details>
  <summary><em>Converted workflow 👇</em></summary>

```yaml
# ADD_YAML
```

</details>

_Note_: You can refer to the previous [lab](./3-dry-run.md) to learn about the fundamentals of the `dry-run` command.

## Custom transformers for an unknown step

ADD_CONTENT_OR_REMOVE

## Custom transformers for environment variables

ADD_CONTENT

That's it! Congratulations, you have overridden Valet's default behavior by customizing the conversion of:

- UPDATE_LIST_HERE
- Environment variables

## Next lab

[Perform a production migration of a CircleCI pipeline](5-migrate.md)
